FOLKWAYS RECORDS Album No. FA 2362 C> 1962 Folkways Records & Service Corp., 701 Seventh Ave., N.Y.C., U.S.A. HORTON BARKER TRADITIONAL SINGER Recorded
in Beech Creek, North Carolina, by SANDY PATON 
<p>HORTON BARKER 
Years ago, a narrow-gauge railway ran through the small town of Laurel Bloomery in the mountainous
northeast corner of Tennessee. The town is named, not for the blossoms of the Rhododendron (called "laurel" by the mountain people), as one might suppose,
but for the circular masses of wrought iron produced by the foundry located there. Nicknamed the "Pea Vine" railroad by the local residents, because of
its twisting, winding, twenty mile route, it served the foundry, the farms, and the logging industry which thrived on the heavily timbered surrounding
hills. One of the engines, a small, black, pot-bellied smoke-belcher, was known affectionately as "Old Huldy".</p>
 
<p>Horton Barker was born in Laurel Bloomery
in 1889, and he recalls hearing "Old Huldy" wheezing and puffing by on its daily run.  Recalls it so clearly that he has appropriated its name for his
favorite pipe.  Now, Horton has "about a bushel" of pipes and his favorite would seem to be the one currently in operation. "Hope you don't mind if I light
up 'Old Huldy', " he will say, digging into his pocket for the Prince Albert tobacco. "I've been smoking for fifty-five years, but I plan to quit before
it gets a real hold on me. " But Horton will never give up "Old Huldy". "I was going to quit smoking today, but I'm afraid to risk it. You see, a fellow
once told me that, if a man was to quit smoking on a particular day of the week, he'd take pneumonia for sure. Trouble is, I can't remember just which
day he said it was." Later, while knocking the ashes out against the heel of his hand: "There! I told you I was going to quit smoking today and that's
the tenth time I've done it. " There's no stopping him --Horton Barker, sight-less since childhood as the result of an accident, Horton Barker photo by
Ray Flerlage is filled with an irrepressible sense of humor. Even the cane he uses to help him find his way about is given a name and a personality. "I'll
just hitch 'Old Morgan' here on the doorknob while we eat." "Old Morgan" does considerably more than let Horton know when he's approaching a step or an
obstacle. He listens to the echo of the tapping metal tip and can surprise you with what it tells him. For instance, he told me when we were passing a
car parked fifteen feet or more to one side of our path. As a boy, he would jump off of a cliff into eighty feet of water and then swim back to the base
of the cliff, locating it by the echo of a clicking noise made with his tongue. Horton now makes his home with his sister and her husband in St. Clair's
Creek (pronounced "Sinkler's"), Virginia, a tiny community in Smyth County, not far from Chilhowie. It's gently rolling country; the green pastures and
the fields of yellowing tobacco broken occasionally-ly by clumps of uncleared forest. In the distance is Mt. Rogers, the highest point in Virginia at 5720
feet, and, just south of that, White Top, where Annabel Buchanan and John Powell directed their famous' Folk Festival during the early 1930's. It was here
that Horton met other great ballad Singers, such as Texas Gladden and "Sailor Dad" Hunt, and added more songs to the repertoire he had inherited from his
mother and developed in' all night song-swapping sessions with other students at the two schools for the blind he attended in his youth.</p>
 
<p>Horton never knew
his father, a lumberman who "worked cutting timber up in West Virginia quite a bit." While the family lived in Tennessee, Horton went to school in Nashville.
Later, when his mother remarried and moved across the state line into Washington County, Virginia, he was transferred to the School for the Blind in Staunton.
There Horton would delight in conceal-ing the fact of his total blindness from his fellow 
students. He used to lead other boys around in the town until, one day, he inadvertently let one of them run into a post. "Say," the fellow asked, rubbing
his bumped head, "just how much do you see?" "Oh, I see pretty well," chuckled Horton. "'Course I can't quite make out sunlight.</p>
<p>Horton was first
visited by a ballad hunter in about 1930. Not sure of the date, Horton does remember that his name was Wil')ston Wilkinson and that he didn't record anything,
but simply listed the songs Horton knew. Within the next few years, however, Horton was recorded by Annabell Buchanan at White Top and by Sarah Gertrude
Knott in Washington, D.C. In 1937, Alan Lomax recorded him for the Archive of American Folk Song at the Library of Congress. Things died down a bit after
that. The country went to war and the work of the Archive was severely curtailed. Anyway, Horton went home to St. Clair's Creek to sit quietly on the porch
and smoke "Old Huldy." Once in a while, his good friend, Richard Chase, a young folklorist he had met at White Top, would come by and visit. Occasionally,
they would pile into the car and go off to a Folk Festival at Boone, North Carolina, or Abingdon, Virginia.</p>
 
<p>Most of the time he just sat and smoked and teased
the boys walking by the house. (He tells of the time two boys came up the road with a nice string of fish. Horton's sister, who had been sitting on the
porch with him, commented on the fish and then went into the house. Horton waited until the boys were directly in front of him, then called out, "Say,
that's sure a nice bunch of fish you have there!" The boys, seeing Horton alone on the porch, were flabbergasted. As they went on up the road, Horton could
hear them whisper-ing back and forth - -"How'd he know we had these fish? You reckon he can see some?" "Naw! He didn't see 'em. He smelled 'em!").</p>
 
<p>Horton's
musical artistry is as keenly developed as his wit, as this record will prove. But Horton is no folksong purist (the true Folk singer rarely is - -he doesn't
have to be); if he hears a song he likes, he sets out to learn it - -simple as that. Some of his songs are really composites of different versions he has
heard at one time or another. "When I hear a version of a song I like better than the one I've known - -well, I just sort of adopt it." Right now he is
anxious to learn the version of "Lord Thomas" he heard Mike Seeger sing at the University of Chicago Folk Festival in February, 1961. "I really like his
version better than mine," he commented, as we we re recording his own. Aside from the classic "Child Ballads" and the lyric folksongs he sings, his repertoire
is made up of what he calls "Southern Sentimental Songs or Plantation Songs", gospel songs, hymns, and curious bits of humorous flotsam he has acquired.
At least one of his songs (Sweet Mary) he learned from his singing teacher at the school in Staunton.</p>
<p> For four years, until his
health forced him to give it up a couple of years ago, Horton earned his living by travelling with a "bible lecturer" in North Carolina and Tennessee, singing
the old gospel songs and sharing the unpredictable returns of the collection plate. "Sometimes he would say things that would aggravate them, make them
mad, and then they'd put all their money into my plate and practically none in his. Of course, I always divided up with him later.</p>

<p>My several days with
Horton Barker were truly memorable ones. We drove together to Beech Creek, North Carolina, where we took advantage of Mr. and Mrs. W. Smith Harmon's generous
hospitality and large living room for the record-ing sessions. On the trip, Horton gave me directions --"Bear right at the top of this hill; Take a left
at the other end of this bridge. " "Off to our right, now, you should be able to see an old brick house. That's over a hundred years old." "Don't I smell
a cemetery on the right now?" (This followed by a string of humorous epitaphs) "That was a good bridge, wasn't it? The next one isn't so good, I'm afraid."
etc. To know Horton Barker, to stroll leisurely with him to the top of a hill while the sun chases away the early morning mist and warms your shoulder-bones,
and --most of all --to sit and listen to him sing' the old ballads in his high, clear voice, unencumbered by accompaniment, is to suddenly become aware
of what is meant by "Amazing Grace.</p>

<p>FOLKWAYS RECORDS Album No. FA 2362 C> 1962 Folkways Records & Service Corp., 701 Seventh Ave., N.Y.C., U.S.A. HORTON BARKER TRADITIONAL SINGER Recorded
in Beech Creek, North Carolina, by SANDY PATON </p>






 : Sandy Paton WAYFARING STRANGER: Horton first heard this sung
by the Harp Singers from Vanderbilt, under the direc-tion of George Pullen Jackson, at the White Top Festival in southwestern Virginia. Later, he learned
it from an old hymnal which he located in his commun-ity. I'm just a poor wayfaring stranger, Wandering through this world of woe, But there's no danger,
toil nor sorrow In that bright world to which I'll go. I'm going there to meet my father, I'm going there no more to roam, I'm only going over Jerdan,
I'm just a-going over home. I know dark clouds will gather 'round me j I know my way is rough and steep. But golden fields lie out before me Where God's
redeemed no more shall weep. I'm going there to meet my mother, I ' m going there no more to roam. I ' m only going over Jerdanj I'm just a-going over
home. I'll soon be free from every trial, ~~ body resting in the old church yard. I'll drop the cross of self-denial And enter on my great reward. I'm
going there to meet my Savior; He said he'd meet me when I come. I'm only going over Jerdanj I'm just a -going over home. 
Page 5
SIDE I, Band 2: WONDROUS LOVE: Horton learned this from an old shape-note hymnal which belonged to his grand-mother. The first verse is frequently printed
"What wondrous love is this that caused the Lord" of Bliss to bear the dreadful curse for my soul. The verse sung here is apparently Horton's own. What
wondrous love is this, o my soul, 0 my soul; What wondrous love is this, o my soul? What wondrous love is this That caused the Lord of bliss To send such
perfect peace To my soul, to my soul; To send such perfect peace To my soul? When I was sinking down, Sinking down, sinking down, When I was sinking down,
Sinking down, When I was sinking down Beneath God's righteous frown, Christ laid aside His crown For my soul, for my soul, Christ laid aside His crown
For my soul. To God and to the Lamb I will sing, I will sing; To God and to the Lamb, I will sing. To God and to the Lamb, Jehovah, great I   am, While
millions join the theme I will sing, I will sing, While millions join the theme I will sing. And when from death I'm free, I'll sing on, I'll sing on,
And when from death I'm free, I'll sing on. And when from death I'm free, I'll sing and joyful be, While others join the throng I'll sing on, I'll sing
on, While others join the throng , I'll sing on. SIDE I, Band 3: THE GYPSY'S WEDDING DAY shows something of the great diversity of Horton's repertoire.
Apparently an old parlor song of the sentimental type popular around the turn of the century, Horton tells me he learned it "from a child, years ago."
My father was a captain of a gypsy tribe, you know, My mother she gave me some counting to do. With a knapsack on my shoulder, I'll bid you all farewell,
I'll take a trip to London some fortunes to tell. As I went walking all down the London street, A handsome young lawyer was the first I chanced to meet.
Was the first I chanced to meet, was the first I chanced to meet, A handsome young lawyer was the first I chanced to meet. (similarly) He viewed my pretty
little brown cheeks for the ones he loved so well (?) Says he, "Little gypsy girl, will you my fortune tell?" "Oh yes, sir, Oh kind sir, hold out to me
your hand; You have many fine fortunes in a far-off distant land. II "You've courted many fa.ir ladies, but you've laid them all aside, And I'm a little
gypsy girl and the one to be your hri de. II 3 He took me, he led me to his house on yonder shore, While servants stood waiting to open wide the door.
The bells they did ring and the music it did play. It was a celebration of a gypsy's wedding day. Once I was a gypsy girl, but now I'm a rich man's bride
With servants to wait on me while in my carriage ride. SIDE I, Band 4: THE MILLER'S WILL: Thi s delightful sa tire on the skullduggery of millers is included
among the Roxburghe Ballads and has been found in the British Isles from the southwest of England (by Baring-Gould) to the Northeast of Scotland (by Gavin
Greig). It is equally popular among the folk of America, having been found all the way from Venoont to Florida. Horton learned his version from a Miss
Stone who lived near Norton, in Wise County, Vir-ginia. There was an old miller who lived all alone, He had three sons who were almost grown. He was about
to mke his will And all that he had was a little old mill. Hi-lo-diddle-lol-day. The miller called to his oldest son, "Son, oh son, I'm almost gone, And
if to you this will I make, Pray tell me the toll that you aim to take." "Father, you know my name is Heck, Out of a bushel I'll take a peck. If my fortune
I   would make, Now this is the toll that I   mean to take." "Son, oh son, I'm afraid you're a fool, You have not learned to follow my rule. This mill
to you I will not give For by such a toll no man can live." The miller then called to his second son, "Son, oh son, I'm almost gone, And if to you this
will I make, Pray tell me the toll that you aim to take." "Father, you know my name is Ralph, Out of a bushel I'll take half. If my fortune I   would make,
Now this is the toll that I   mean to take." Son, oh son, etc. The miller then called to his youngest son, etc. "Father, you know my name is Paul, Out
of a bushel I'll take all; Take all the grain and swear to the sack And kick the old farmer if he ever comes back." "Glory to God", the old man says, I've
got one son who's learned my ways l" "Hallelujahl" the old woman cried, And the old man straightened out his legs and he died. SIDE I, Band 5: AMP.ZING
GRACE: This beautiful old hymn, still very popular among the people of the southern mountains, is sung by Horton Barker to what he calls "the old melody".
First learned from an old hymnal, Horton later adapted it to this tune which was taught to him by "Aunt Edith Hart, an old lady in our community." Amazing
Grace, how sweet the sound That saved a wretch like me; I   once was lost, but now I'm found, Was blind, but now I see. I want to live a Christian here;
I want to die a-shouting. I want to feel my savior near When soul and body's parting. 
Page 6
'Twas grace tbat taught my heart to f'ear And grace my f'ears relieved. How precious did that grace appear The hour I f'irst believed. (repeated) When
we've been there ten thousand years, Bright shining as the sun, We've no less days to sing God's praise Tban when we f'irst begun. I want to live a Christian
here; I want to die a-shouting. I want to f'eel my savior near Till soul and body's parted. SIDE I, Band 6: LORD THOMAS AND FAffi ELLENDER: Horton learned
this version of' Child #73 f'rom Mrs. Melissa Roe, the sister of' the brother-in-law with whom he makes his home. Mrs. Roe, who lived in Chilhowie, Vir-ginia,
was killed by lightning in 1923, while milk-ing a cow under a large hickory tree. Horton omits the usual first verse, in which Lord Thomas asks his mother's
advice as to which of' the young ladies he should marry. "Lord Thomas, Lord Thomas, take my advice, Go bring the Brown Girl home, For she has land and
a house of her own; Fair Ellender, she bas none." He called it to his waiting maids, By one, by two, by three, "Go bridle, go saddle my milky white steed,
Fair Ellender I must see." He rode and he rode till he came to her gate, So lively he tingled the rein, And none were so ready as Fair Ellender herself'
As she rose to let him in. "I've come to ask you to my wedding today." "Bad news, Lord Thomas," says she, "For I, your bride, I thought I   would be; Bad
news, Lord Thomas," said she. She called it to her f'ather and mother, To make them both as one, "Shall I go to Lord Thomas's wedding Or tarry at home
alone?" She dressed herself' so f'ine in silk, Her very maids in green, And every city that she rode through, They took her to be some queen. She rode
and she rode till she came to his gate, So lively she tingled the rein, And none were so ready as Lord Thomas himself' As he rose to let her in. He took
her by the lily white hand, He led her through the ball, He sat her down at the head of' the table Among the quality all. "Lord Thomas," says she, "Is
this your bride? I'm sure she looks very brown. You might have married as fair a young lady As ever the sun shone on." The Brown Girl had a penknif'e in
her band, It keen and very sharp, Between the long ribs and the short She pierced Fair Ellender to the heart. He took the Brown Girl by the hand, He led
her through the ball, And with a sword he cut her head of'f' And kicked it against the wall. He placed the handle against the ground, The point against
his breast, Saying, "Here's the death of' three true lovers, God sent their souls to rest. "I want my grave dug long and wide And dig it very deep; I want
Fair Ellender in my arms, The Brown Girl at my f'eet." SIDE I, Band 7: BOW AND BALANCE: Horton learned this ballad (The Two Sisters -Child #10) f'rom his
schoolmates in Nashville, Tennessee, about sixty years ago. He says, however, tba t "other versions I heard later may have got mixed up in it." There was
an old woman lived on the sea shore, Bow and balance to me, There was an old woman lived on the sea shore, Her number of' daughters, one, two, three, four,
And I'll be true to my love If' my love'll be true to me. There was a young man come there to see them And the oldest one got struck on him. He bought
the youngest a beaver hat And the oldest one got mad at that. "Oh sister, oh sister, let's walk the sea shore And see the ships as they sail o'er." While
these two sisters were walking the shore, The oldest pushed the youngest o'er. "Oh sister, oh sister, please lend me your hand, Then you may bave Willie
and all of his land." "I never, I never will lend you my hand, J;lut I'll bave Willie and all of' his land." Sometimes she sank and sometimes she swam,
Until she came to the old mill dam. "Oh Father, oh Father, 'come draw your dam, Here's either a mermaid or a swan." The miller he got his fishing hook
And fished the maiden out of the brook. "Oh miller, oh miller, here's five gold rings, If you'll put me saf'e on shore again." The miller received those
five gold rings And pushed the maiden in again. The miller was hung at his own mill gate For drowning little sister Kate. SIDE II, Band 1: AT THE FOOT
OF YONDERS MOUNTAIN: Another lovely f'olk lyric added to Horton f s repertoire at the WhiteTop Folk Festival. A. L. Lloyd recently f'ound the same tune
being used f'or a Scottish whaling ballad. At the foot of' yonders mountain there runs a clear stream; At the foot of' yonders mountain there lives a f'air
queen. She's handsome, she's proper, her ways are complete, And I   know no better pastime than to be with my sweet. But why she won't have me I well understand;
She wants some f'reeholder and I have no land. But I can maintain her on silver and gold And as many other fine things as my love's house can hold. Oh,
if I  were a scribe and could write a f'air band, I'd send her a letter from this distant land; I'd send it by the waters just f'or to let her know I'll
think of pretty Sarah wherever I go. Oh, if I   were a bird with swif't wings and could f'ly, It's to my love's window each night I'd draw nigh; I'd sit
by her window all night long and cry Toot, f'or love of' pretty Saro, I gladly would die. , 1 
Page 7
J , J SIDE II, Band 2: THE TURKISH REBILEE: Horton learned this version of Child H2~ from a schoolmate named Beecher Webster at the school they attended
in Nashville, Tennessee. About the ballad, Horton says, "Soma people sing it with the boy on the Golden Willow Tree, b ut I have it just the other way."
There was a little ship that sailed on the sea And the name of this ship was the Turkish Rebilee; She sailed on the lonely, lonesome water, She sailed
on the lone soma sea. T here was another ship that sailed on the sea And the name of this ship was the Golden Willow Tree; She sailed on the --etc. Up
stepped a little sailor, saying what'll you give to me If I will that ship to the bottom of the sea? If I'll sink her in --etc. I have a house and I have
land And I have a daughter that shall be at your cOlllm3.nd If you'll sink her in --etc. He bowed on his breast and away swam he; He swam till he came
to the Golden  Willow Tree; He sunk her in --etc. He had a little auger all fit for the bore; He bored nine holes in the bottom of the floor. He sunk her
in the --etc. Some had hats and some had caps A-trying to stop the salt water gaps As she sunk in --etc. Some were playing cards and some were shooting'
dice While others stood around a-giving good advice As she sunk in the --etc. He bowed on his breast and away swam he; He swam till he came to the Turkish
Rebilee. "I've sunk her in the --etc." "NoW Captain, will you be as good as your word, Or either will you take me in on board? I've sunk her in the --etc."
"No, I won't be as good as my word And neither will I take you in on board, Though you've sunk her in the --etc." "If it were not for the love I have for
your men, I'd do unto you as I've done unto them; I'd sink you in the --etc." He bowed on his breast and down sunk he, A-bidding farewell to the Turkish
Rebilee; He sunk in the --etc. SIDE II , Band 3: BLUE-HAIRa> JIMMY: A wonderful, grotesque bit of non-sense which Horton learned from John Wilson of Ports-mouth,
Virginia, when they were both students at the school for the blind in Staunton. Horton introduced this to his audience at the University of Chicago Folk
Music Festival as "a sort of a silly song, but I always like to sing it for the kids. They seem to enjoy it." He's gone forevermore, is our darling blue-haired
boy, We'll never see our cross-eyed darling anymore. Like a dream he passed away on the thirty-ninth of May, He never died so suddenly before. No more
upon the mat will he play with pussycat, No more between his teeth he'll squeeze her tail. No more he'll rub her nose against the red-hot iron stove, For
little brother Jimmy's kicked the pail. 5 We knew he was departing by the color of his breath; We saw his eyebrows dropping in the mud. The doctor said
the only thing to save the boy from death Was to stop the circulation of his blood. We gently bathed his head in a pot of boiling lead And then we gently
laid him down to rest, But through the night a burglar came and broke into the room And swiped the mustard plaster off his chest. We filled his mouth with
glue to try to bring him to; Alas, though, all our efforts were in vain. (And last of all -?) we tried, but he sneezed and smiled and died, He blew his
nose and smiled and died again. He's gone forevermore at the age of ninety-four, There's nothing in this world his life could save. I'm going to the barber
shop to fill his last request To plant a bunch of whiskers on his grave. SIDE II, Band 4: THE BRUNKARD'S COURTSHIP (The Courting Case): When Horton was
a boy, his mother, who was born.in Allegheny County, North Carolina, in 1861, used to sing this song to him. Perhaps, however, Horton is deliberately forgetting
the final verse in which the woman, as usual, has the last word. Brown, in his North Carolina collection, prints two texts, one of which ends where Horton's
does, but the other follows that with; "When I get cold and pinched with cold, it won't be you to keep me warm; I'll get somebody I love much better and
lie closer in his arms." Sharp prints two texts, one of which suggests that another man will keep her warm, while the other leaves her with only her clothes
to provide such comfort. "Kind sir, I see you've come again, Pray tell me what it's for; I told you plain on yonder hill That you needn't come here anymore,
 anymore, That you needn't come here anymore." "Kind miss, I have a very fine house And also a mighty fine yard." "Who would stay all night with ma When
you were out playing cards, When you were out playing cards?" "Now, miss, I never did the like, For I never thought it right. Now, if you'll promise to
be my wife, I'll never stay out one night, I'll never stay out one night." ''Kind sir, why do you tell me that, To try to take me in? As soon as I'd become
your bride You'd gamble and drink again, You'd gamble and drink again." "Kind miss, I'm a very fine man, I also dress mighty fine; How I'd like some pretty
little miss To kiss these lips of mine, To kiss these lips of mine." "Kind sir, you may be a very fine man And also dress mighty fine, But you are the
last young man That'll kiss these lips of mine, That'll kiss these lips of mine." "NOW, mad.am, you're a hard old case, And just a little too hard to please;
And when you're old some of these cold nights I hope to the Lord you'll freeze, I hope to the Lord you'll freeze." 
Page 8
SIDE II, Band 5: THE FARMER'S CURST WIFE: This is Wldoubtedly the ballad (Child #278) for which Horton Barker is best known. He tells me he learned it
from a singer named Debusk of Widener's Valley, Virginia, but adds, "I reay have some of Texas Gladden's verses mixed in it." There was an old rean at
the foot of the hill; If he ain't moved away he's living there still. Sing hi-diddle-I-diddle-I-fie, Diddle-I-diddle-I-day. He hitched up his horse and
he went out to plow, But how to get around, he didn't know how. The devil came to his house one day, Says "One of your family I'm a-going to take away."
Then says the old man, "I am undone, For I'm afraid you've come for my oldest son." "It's neither your son nor your daughter I crave, B ut your old scolding
woman I now must have." The devil put her in a sack And slWlg her up across his back. "Take her on, take her on, with the joy of my heart; I hope, by gollies,
you'll never part." He had barely Gotten to the forks of the road When he says, "Old lady, you're a terrible load." H e carried her down to the gates of
hell And says "PWlch up the fire, we're goine to scorch her well." In come a little devil a-dragging his chain, She up with a hatchet and split out his
brain. Another little devil went climbing the wall And says, "Take her back, Daddy, she'll murder us all." The old man was a -peeping out of the cl~ck
And sa" the poor devil come a - wagging her back. She fOillld the old man sick in the bed And up with a butter-stick and paddled his head. The old woman
went whistling over the hill, "The devil wOuldn't have me so I wonder who will." Now thIs is what a woman can do, She can out do the devil and her old
nan, too. rrhere 's one advanta£e women have over r:1en, They can c·o to hell and come back acain. SIDE IILYand 6: THERE WAS AN OLD IADY (or The Hich Old
Lady): J ohn Powell, composer and folk sone collector who ma1<es his home in Virrinia and was co-director of the ,fuite Top Festival (alone with Anp~bel
Fuchanan), taucht this one to Horton durinG the early thirties. The source is apparently Sharp's B version (Vol. 1; p. 349; English Folk Songs from the
Southern Appalachians-'-:----------Thcr~ 1-r.)5 fin old lady in our tmffi, In our town diel dwell, She loved her husband dearly But another man twice as
well. Sing too-de-um, sing too-de-urr., Whack, fol-lolly-day. She ,Tcnt down to the butcher shop To see if she could find, To see if she could find something
To make her old lJ>~n blind. She got twelve dozen marrow bones, She rrade him suck them all; Says he, "Old wOI:'2.n, I'm so blind I cannot see at all."
6 Says he, "I'd go and drown myself, If only I could see." Says she, "My dearest husband, I'll go and show you the way." She bundled him up in his old
grey coat, She took him to the brim; Says he, "I cannot drown myself Unless you push me in." The old woman took a step or two back To give a rolling spring;
~he old man stepped a little to the side And she went tumbling in. She bubbled and gurgled and squawled out As loud as she could bawl; Says he, "Old woman,
I'm so blind I can't see you at all." The old I:'an being kind-hearted, For fear that she could swim, He went and got a very long pole And pushed her further
in. ROLLY TRUDUN: This great favorite among young singers of "folk songs came to Horton from the singing of his schoolmates in Nashville. A very similar
version was recorded by Vance Handolph in Springfield, Missouri, as sUD£ by May K. McCord, and may be heard on Album 12 --AnGlo-American Songs and Ballads
--of the Library of COIlGress, Music Division, from the Collec-tions of the Archive of American Folk SonG. I went out one morning to take the morning air,
Rolly trudum, trudum, true dolly day; I went out one morning to take the morninG air, There stood a woman tall{ing to her daughter fair, Rolly truQt~,
trudum, true dolly day. (Similarly) Hush your silly talking and hold that rattling tongue, For, to marry, you know you are too youne;. Suppose that I were
willing, where'd you find your I:'an? Lord sal(es, Manuny, I could get old Dendy Sam. Suppose Sam was to slight you, as you did him before? Lord sakes,
Mammy, I could Get a dozen more. Such as doctors and lawyers or boys that follow plows, Lord sakes, Mammy, I want to narry now. Now my daughter's married
and wpat shall I   do? Lord sakes, girls, well, I just believe I'll marry, too. CITY FOUR SQUARE: Typical of the many spirituals Horton sane while travelling
with the bible lecturer through-out North Carolina and Tennessee, this one was learned from the singinc of Dr. Orr, dean of Emery ColleGe. I n the land
of fadeless day Lie s that city four square; It shall never :;:>ass a,ra.y And there is no night there. God shall wipe away all tears, There's no death,
no pain, no fears, And they count not time by years For there is no night there. There they need no sWlshine briGht, In that city four square; For the
Lamb is all the light And there is no night there. All the gates with pearls are laid In that city four square; All the streets of gold are nade And there
is no night there. 
Page 9
There the gates will never close, In that city four square; There life's crystal river flows And there is no night there. SIDE II, Band 9: DEVILISH MARY:
Presumably of Irish or~g~n (Peter Kennedy has recently collected it there under the title of "The Wearing of the Breeches"), this de-lightful tale of the
war between the sexes has been found in Kentucky, LOuisiana, and in the Ozarks. Horton's very singable version comes from Te nnessee. When I was a boy
growing up, Thought I'd never marry; Saw so many pretty little girls, But none of them wuld have me. Rare rare rinktum a-hoodle-urn a-rinkturn, Rare rare
rinktum a-razey; Rare rare rinkturn a-hoodle-tun a-rinktum, Rare rare ain't she a daisy? One little girl I came across Lived up in London's derry; Her
hair was as red as a golden thread And they called her Devilish Mary. We hadn't been courting but a week or tw, We both got in a hurry; We both agreed
on the same old spot And married the very next Thursday. One night when I was late getting in And she was in a blunder, She up with a big old liquor jug
And floored my head like thunder. Mary, she's a good old girl, She cooks and washes the dishes, But every time that girl gets mad She wants to wear my
britches. If ever I marry again in this world, It'll be for the love of riches; I'll marry a girl sixteen feet high That can't get in my britches. SIDE
II, Band 10: HOP, OLD RABBIT, HOP: Reported from allover the south, primarily from Negro Singers, this jingle was included by Joel Chandler Harris in Uncle
Remus, His SonGs and Sayings, 1928 ed. The verses about the old hC)re;e~--­howe-ver, are generally associated with the sea song which accompanied the ceremony
of paying off the "dead horse" after the first month at sea. The sailor, having drawn his first month's pay in advance (usually to square his account with
the boarding-house master), celebrated the start of the crew actually earning pay by drageing an effigy of a horse around the deck, finally hOisting it
to the, main yardarm, cutting the line, and cheering as it dropped into the sea. Yonder comes a little man a-riding by; I says, "Old _n, your horse'll
die." Hop, hop, hop, old rabbit, hop. "If he dies, I'll tan his skin, • But, if he lives, I'll ride him again." "If he dies, it's no big loss, But, if
he lives, he's my old hoss." "Oh, Mr. Rabbit, you're looking mighty brave." "But, yes, my lord, I'm hunting a cave." "Oh, Mr. Rabbit, your ears are mighty
long." "Yes, my lord, they're put on wrong." "Oh, Mr. Rabbit, you're looking mighty thin." "Yes, my lord, I'm splitting the wind." "Oh, Mr. Rabbit, you're
lOOking mighty brave." "But, yes, my lord, I'm hunting a cave." 7 "Oh, Mr. Rabbit, you got a bad habit, A-getting in the garden and eating up the cabbage."
I'll get old Jack and put him on the track And run that rabbit to thunder and back. SIDE II, Band 11: SWEET MARY: Not a folksong, but Horton doesn't care.
If he likes a song, he sings it. Horton learned this parlor song from his singing teacher at the school he attended in Staunton, Virginia. "Suppose I should
talk to your father, Sweet Mary," says I. "Don't talk to my father," says Mary, Beginning to cry. "My father he loves me so dearly, He'll never consent
I should go. If you talk to my father," says Mary, "He'll surely say no." "Then suppose I should talk to your mother, Sweet Mary," says I. "Don't taDt
to my mother," says Mary, Beginning to cry. "MeT mother says men are deceivers And never, I know, will consent. She says girls in a hurry who marry At
leisure repent." "Then how shall I get you, my jewel, Sweet Mary?" says I. "Since your parents are both so contrary, Most surely I'll die." "Oh, never
say die, dear," says Mary, ·"A way now to save you I see; Since my parents are both so contrary, You'd better ask me." SIDE II, Band 12: PADDY DOYLE: As
Richard Chase points out in his Signet Key Book, American Folk Tales and Songs, this is not, strictly speaking, a folk song:--Horton learned it from "sailor
Dad" Hunt, another popular performer at the White Top Folk Festival. "Sailor Dad" brought a seabag full of British songs home with him when he gave up
deep-sea sailing out of Liverpool to settle down and tend his garden in Marion, Virginia. Young paddy Doyle lived in Kilarney, Courted a girl named Biddy
O'Toole; His tongue was tipped with the Irish blarney, At making love he was no fool. Whack for the looral, laurel, ladle, Whack for the looral, laurel,
lay. Whack for the 100ra1, laurel, ladle, Whack for the looral, laurel, lay. 'Twas late at night in one November -Paddy went out to meet his love; What
night it was, I don't remember, But the moon shone brightly from above. That day the boy had got some liquor, Which made his spirits light and gay; "What's
the use of waDtin' further, When I know she'll meet me on the way?" Paddy laid down and went to sleep In Doran's barn with the cows and sheep; And there
he slept and there he lay And dreamed of Biddy till the break of day. He dreamed he was hugging and kissing Biddy, When Doran's donkey began to bray; Paddy
woke up with an awful fright, He'd been hugging the donkey all that night. 
Page 10
ASCH RECORDS AA 4  -THE ASCH RECORDINGS 1939-1945. FOLK SINGERS VOL. 2, RECORD 2. Compiled and edited by Moses Asch and Charles Edward Smith, notes by
C. E. Smith. Richard Dyer-Bennet, vocal w. guitar: Andrew Rowan Summers, vocal w. dulcimer; John Jacob Niles, vocal w. dulcimer; Cratis Williams, un-accompanied
vocal; Texas Gladden, unaccompanied vocal; Hobart Smith, vocal w. guitar: Texas Gladden and Hobart Smith, vocal and fiddle; Bascom La-Mar Lunsford, vocal
w. 5-string banjo: George Edwards, unaccompanied vocal. Dock Reese, unaccompanied vocal; Ho bart Smith, piano,; Champion Jack Dupree, piano; Sormy Terry,
falsetto voice and harmonica; Woody Guthrie, Cisco Houston, others, instrumental; Woody, Cisco and Sonny, harmonica and 2 guitars; Rev. Gary Davis, guitar;
Baby Dodds, drums. 1-12" 33-1/ 3 rpm, notes Both above records are available in two-record set as: AA 3/ 4 2-12" 33-1/ 3 rpm, notes AA 701 MISSISSIPPI
HEAD START. Child Development Group of Mississippi. Compiled and Edited by Polly Greenberg. On the record we hear a cross-section of the participating
children and adults in a typical learning program. Da da  da -Just The Other Day -  Good Morning -Take This Hammer -Where Is Theresa -  When Mr. Sun -Mary
Mack -  Give Me That Old Time Religion -Instrumental Dances -  I Got A Mother -Bear Hunt -Little Sally Walker -On The Battlefield -  Amen, Amen - Why Do
The Drums Go - All Of God's Children Soon I  Will Be Done -Paw Paw Patch -We've Been 'Buked -The Drinking Gourd -Little Old Lady -Charlie Brown -Go Tell
It On The Mountain -Just A Closer Walk With Thee -Beat One Hammer and many more. 2-12" 33-1/3 rpm, notes in box AA 702 -  AFRO-AMERICAN MUSIC. A demonstra-tion
recording by Dr. Willis James. Dr. James lectured and demonstrated at the Newport Folk Festi-val and gave this lecture at Atlanta University. Hollers and
singing and the use  of ethnic records demonstrate; African background, Rhythm, Speech and Song, Cries, The Blues, Jubilee Songs, Negro Music from white
sources, Jazz. Complete text included. 2-12" LP boxed ASCH 101 -  THE BLUES. The Blues is a  sound track from the film by Samuel Charters. You hear the
blues: singing, talking, guitar anq harmonica playing, as part of the'lives of men like M~mphis Willie B.; J.D. Short, born and raised in M.ssissippi -
 now living in St. Louis; Furry Lewis and Gus Cannon from Memphis; Baby Tate from Spartan-burg, South Carolina; Sleepy John Estes from Browns-ville, Tennessee;
and Pink Anderson of Spartanburg, who has already started his six year old son out singing: and playing the blues. Sleepy John Estes plays the blues in
front of his sharecropper's shack: "What I  made out of myself is a crying shame. "Well, the blues may move him out of his shack, because Sleepy John has
been "discovered. " Furry Lewis says: "The blues is true. " Will success spoil Sleepy John Estes? 1-12" 33-1/ 3 rpm, notes AHS 751 -  LATIN AMERICAN CHILDREN
GAME SONGS RECORDED ON LOCATION BY HENRIETTA YURCHENKO. Notes and Translation by Henrietta Yurchenko. Assisted by Peter Gold and Peter Yurchenko. In Latin
America, as throughout the world, there are two kinds of children'S songs: those taught by their elders or their teachers, and those learned at play. This
collection includes both types. The first group includes such gems as Mambru, Las Tres Cautivas, etc. The second group includes Spanish Christmas Carols
and songs heard every day during school recess, in the back yards and streets of the villages and towns all over Mexico and Puerto Rico. Text Included
*Stereo 1-12" 33-1/ 3 rpm LP AHS 823 -SQUARE DANCE WITH SOUL with Rev. Fred. Doug. Kirkpatrick and the Hearts. Booklet contains complete illustrated dance
inst. with an introduction by Rev. Kirkpatrick. Loop-the-Loop, In and Out the Window, Red River Valley, Raise the Roof, Stay With Me, Take a little Peep,
Hurry (5&3) Soul Cindy, Kick in the Middle, Swing Your Thing. 1-12" Stereo LP, notes AH 752 -  MARCHING ACROSS THE GREEN GRASS and other American Childrens
Game Songs by' JEAN RITCHIE -  An audio-visual experience from Miss Ritchie's treasure chest of Childrens' game songs that include such favorites as Sailor,
Sailor On The Sea, Train A-Comin', Marching Across The Green Grass, Open The Window and others. All arranged for the total involvement of the child. Text
included. 1-12" LP AH 3831 -  BALLADS AND SONGS OF THE BLUE RIDGE MOUNTAINS PERSISTENCE AND CHANGE Twenty-one songs and ballads of the Blue Ridge that
includes favorites Pretty Polly, Green Willow Tree, Barbry Allen, Lonesome Day, etc. Performed by Paul Joines, Sarah Hawkes, Granny Porter, Kilby Reeves,
Polly Joines, Spud Gravely, Ivor Melton, Herbert Delp, Ruby Vass, Glen Neaves and Cliff Evans. Glen Smith and Wade Ward playing the Fiddle.Text included.
1-12" LP AH 3902 -  KILBY SNOW with auto harp, guitar, banjo etc. acc. by Jim Snow, Mike Hudak and Mike Seeger, Molly Hare, Greenback Dollar, Wind and
